# Visualizing Uncertainty in Molecular Simulation

Machine learning (ML) methods are becoming ubiquitous in many fields, from physical sciences to health care. Among the many concerns of deploying these models into the real world are evaluating their reliability, interpretability, and robustness. While tasks such as classification often benefit from having a discrete set of options to predict, regressor models have a wide spectrum of possible outcomes, particularly when the models are in the extrapolation regime. One way to prevent misleading predictions is quantifying uncertainty in regression tasks. However, adding one extra degree of freedom to these models often adds an extra burden to the developers and users, and may hinder the interpretability of the outcomes.

In this final project, we will focus on visualizing uncertainty in ML models for physical sciences. In particular, we will address the problem of uncertainty quantification in atomistic simulations using ML force fields. Although parametrizing interatomic interactions is a decades-old field, no work has addressed the visualization of uncertainty in this area. The high-dimensional input space coupled with the diversity of molecular conformations prevents clarity in these representations and hinders interpretability. 

To promote a better understanding of these issues, we will tell an animated story on the interplay of molecular simulations and uncertainty. Building on [a publication by Daniel](https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.11588), whose code and data are publicly available [here](https://github.com/learningmatter-mit/Atomistic-Adversarial-Attacks), we will animate static figures representing potential energy surfaces and molecular simulations using a “scrolly-telling” narrative. The story will walk the viewer through the thought process of adding uncertainty to the simulations, and how the final results can benefit from these features. This project will raise awareness for the importance of interpretability and error detection in ML models for physical simulations. Our goal is to utilize the powerful capabilities of visualizations to minimize any barrier to understanding the topic.


## Design Decisions
Our visualization is centred on narrative story-telling through user-controlled pace because our team believes that it is the most effective way to understand a complex subject matter. We implemented this strategy by building a “scrolly-telling” tool which comprises four primary components: (1) the scroller, (2) the descriptors, (3) the visuals, and (4) the navigator.

The scroller is the key component which allows users to control the pace of the read by providing the scrolling functionality. In building our scroller, we set triggers at select page intervals to ensure that the right mix of descriptors and visuals appear at the right time. This is extremely important for emphasis and flow; specific ideas should be focused on only after pre-requisite knowledge has been imparted. Users will get to control how fast they want the ideas to flow using the scroller.

The descriptors are the texts which provide contextual information on the visuals being shown and are positioned on the left side of the browser. They are initially set to zero opacity and are designed to fade into vision along with the visuals as the section is scrolled into view. They will fade away as the page is further scrolled. In producing the descriptor, we made a conscious decision to include only the minimal text required to describe a visual. This is done to avoid cluttering and to generate focus.

The visuals are the images and graphs that condense all the findings of the research. They are rich in information and are complementary to the descriptor. Unlike the descriptors which position and opacity change with scrolling, only the opacity of the visuals changes with scrolling. Select images fade into vision as user scrolls through the page. The positions of the visuals are all fixed and do not change with scrolling. We also included some interactivity with the visuals to allow users to quickly explore a few points within a complex manifold and see the impact of their proposed changes.  

The navigator is a shortcut function on the top left side of the page which allows users to quickly navigate to a section without being constrained by the flow of the scroller. We built the navigator based on feedback from our peers who wanted more flexibility in accessing a wide range of sections quickly. We learned that this tool helps users to revise and reinforce concepts by jumping between different sections instantaneously.  


## Development Process
This visualization tool was developed over the course of four weeks and the development process was very collaborative and iterative. After multiple meetings to brainstorm ideas, we decided to visualize a scientific paper because we wanted to alleviate a pain point where only a small niche of experts can comprehend the publication. We aimed to broaden the range of audience who can understand these materials through visualizations and we hope that the same framework can be used to visualize other complex research publications. 

After deciding on the scope of the project, the team met bi-weekly to propose and build candidate solutions, review progress, and divide up next steps. The process of working individually to develop ideas, then coming together to review and further brainstorm continued through the rest of the project as we incorporated feedback from classmates and developed the final version. In making decisions on what to include, we weighed the value to the reader of each visual or interactive aspect against the time expected to achieve that aspect. We are pleased with our final submission, which provides multiple opportunities for interaction and exploration of the primary publication.

In addition to attending meetings to compare work and brainstorm new ideas, each team member contributed in the following way: 
- Aik Jun (AJ) built the scrolling functionality which controls the flow of the stories and the animations that accompany the scroll.
- Franklin created all the interactivity that bolster the story telling and was in charge of component positioning and the aesthetics of the website. She also created all the videos for the project.
- Daniel generated all the images and graphs for the visualization. He was in charge of maintaining and updating the website along with the code base.
- All team members contributed to the final write-up of the project. 

Our team is: Aik Jun Tan, Franklin Morgan, and Daniel Schwalbe-Koda. The webpage is found on [this link](https://6859-sp21.github.io/final-project-atomistic-uncertainty)